# Disclaimer

No warranty is expressed or implied regarding the usefulness or completeness of the information and documentation provided. References to commercial products do not imply endorsement by the Author. The concepts, materials, and methods used in the algorithms and described in the documentation are for informational purposes only. The Author has made substantial effort to ensure the accuracy of the algorithms and the documentation, but the Author shall not be held liable, nor his employer or funding sponsors, for calculations and/or decisions made on the basis of application of the scripts and documentation. The information is provided "as is" and anyone who chooses to use the information is responsible for her or his own choices as to what to do with the data and the individual is responsible for the results the follow from their decisions.

This web site contains external links to other, external web sites and information provided by third parties. There may be technical inaccuracies, typographical or other errors, programming bugs or computer viruses contained within the web site or its contents. Users may use the information and links at their own risk. The Author of this web site excludes all warranties whether express, implied, statutory or otherwise, relating in any way to this web site or your use of this web site; and liability (including for negligence) to users in respect of any loss or damage (including special, indirect or consequential loss or damage such as loss of revenue, unavailability of systems or loss of data) arising from or in connection with any use of the information on or access through this web site for any reason whatsoever (including negligence).
